At www .budget.gov , Americans will find the budget of the F ederal Government for F iscal Year
2009. Two key principles guided the development of my Budget—keeping America safe and ensuring
our continued prosperity.
As we enter this New Year, our economy retains a solid foundation despite some c hallenges ,
revenues ha ve reac hed record levels , and we ha ve reduced the F ederal deficit by $250 billion since
2004. Thanks to the hard work of the American people and spending discipline in W ashington, we
are now on a path to balance the budget by 2012. Our formula for ac hieving a balanced budget is
simple: create the conditions for economic growth, keep taxes low, and spend taxpa yer dollars wisely
or not at all.
As Commander in Chief , my highest priority is the security of the American people . So my
Budget invests substantial resources to protect the United States from those who would do us harm.
Continuing our Nation’ s efforts to combat terrorism around the globe , my Budget provides our men
and women in uniform the tools they need to succeed in Afghanistan and Iraq, and it furnishes the
resources needed for our civilians to help those nations ac hieve economic and political stabilization.
My Budget also strengthens our overseas diplomatic capabilities and development efforts , advances
our political and economic interests abroad, and improves the lives of people around the world.
Here at home , we are blessed to live in a country that rew ards hard work and innovation. In
our flexible and dynamic economy, people can pursue their dreams , turn ideas into enterprises , and
provide for their families .
As we look bac k over the past 7 years , we see the economy has successfully responded to substantial
c hallenges , inc luding a recession, terrorist attac ks , corporate scandals , w ars , and devastating natural
disasters . It is a measure of our economy’ s resilience and the effectiveness of pro -growth policies that
our economy has absorbed these shoc ks , grown for 6 straight years , and had the longest period of
uninterrupted job growth on record. Yet mixed indicators confirm that economic growth cannot be
taken for granted. T o insure against the risk of an economic downturn, I will work with the Congress
to pass a growth plan that will provide immediate , meaningful, and temporary help to our economy.
Americans ha ve real concerns about their ability to afford healthcare coverage , pa y rising energy
bills , and meet monthly mortgage pa yments . They expect their elected leaders in W ashington to
address these pressures on our economy. So my Budget puts forth proposals to make health care
more affordable and accessible , reduce our dependence on oil, and help Americans struggling to keep
their homes .
Above all, my Budget continues the pro -growth policies that ha ve helped promote innovation and
entrepreneurship . I will not jeopardize our country’ s continued prosperity with a tax increase . Higher
taxes would only lead to more w asteful spending in W ashington—putting at risk both economic
growth and a balanced budget.
As we work to keep taxes low, we must do more to restrain spending . My Budget proposes to keep
non -security discretionary spending growth below 1 percent for 2009 and then hold it at that level
for the next 4 years . It also cuts spending on projects that are not ac hieving results—because good
intentions alone do not justify a program that is not working .
One of the best w a ys to reduce w aste and increase accountability is to make F ederal spending
more transparent. T o help Americans see where their money is being spent, we ha ve launc hed a
website called www .USAspending .gov , and to help Americans see the kind of results they are getting
for their money, we launc hed www .ExpectMore .gov . I invite all Americans to log on and find out for
themselves how their hard -earned tax dollars are being spent.
Billions of those tax dollars go to something called earmarks . Earmarks are special -interest
items that are slipped into big spending bills or committee reports , often at the last hour, without
discussion or debate . Last J anuary, I asked the Congress to reform earmarks , and la wmakers took
some modest steps in that direction. But they failed to end the practice of concealing earmarks in
report language—and they continued to fund thousands of them. So I will take steps to advance
earmark reform. I also call on the Congress to adopt the legislative line -item veto , whic h gives
the legislative and executive branc hes a tool to help eliminate w asteful spending . Common -sense
reform will help prevent billions of taxpa yers’ dollars from being spent on unnecessary and
unjustified projects .
As we take these steps to address discretionary spending , we also need to confront the biggest
c hallenge to the F ederal budget: the unsustainable growth in entitlement spending . Many
Americans depend on programs like Social Security, Medicare , and Medicaid, and we ha ve an
obligation to make sure they are sound for our c hildren and grandc hildren. If we do not address
this c hallenge , we will lea ve our c hildren three bad options: huge tax increases , huge deficits , or
huge cuts in benefits . The longer we put off the problem, the more difficult, unfair, and expensive a
solution becomes .
My Budget works to slow the rate of growth of these programs in the short term, whic h will sa ve
$208 billion over 5 years . This step alone would reduce Medicare’ s 75-year unfunded obligation by
nearly one -third. My Administration cannot solve this problem alone , though. W e need a
commitment from the Congress to reform and improve these vital programs so they can serve future
generations of Americans .
In my 2009 Budget, I ha ve set c lear priorities that will help us meet our Nation’ s most pressing
needs while addressing the long -term c hallenges ahead. W ith pro -growth policies and spending
discipline , we will balance the budget in 2012, keep the tax burden low, and provide for our national
security. And that will help make our country safer and more prosperous .