America is a country of opportunity. Throughout our history, we ha ve overcome great c hallenges
by dra wing on the strength, creativity, and resolve of the American people . W e ha ve adapted to
c hange—while maintaining our commitment to freedom and an open economy.
Our economy is strong and growing , F ederal revenues are robust, and we ha ve made significant
progress in reducing the deficit. The Budget I am presenting ac hieves balance by 2012. My formula
for a balanced budget reflects the priorities of our country at this moment in its history: protecting the
homeland and fighting terrorism, keeping the economy strong with low taxes , and keeping spending
under control while making F ederal programs more effective .
As Commander in Chief , my highest priority is the security of our Nation. My Budget invests
substantial resources to fight the Global W ar on T error, and ensure our homeland is protected from
those who would do us harm. W e will transform our military to meet the new threats of the 21 s t
Century and provide the bra ve men and women on the front lines with the resources they need to be
successful in this decisive ideological struggle . The Budget will support a new strategy in Iraq that
demands more from Iraq’ s elected government, and gives American forces in Iraq the reinforcements
they need to complete their mission. And it will continue to provide the tools necessary to keep
America safe by detecting , disrupting , and dismantling terrorist plots .
The U.S . economy is strong . Since August 2003, 7.2 million jobs ha ve been created. Unemploy-
ment is low. W ages are growing . Productivity is strong . Inflation and interest rates are low. And
we ha ve seen tremendous progress despite a series of c hallenges , inc luding recession, the terrorist
attac ks of 2001, corporate scandals , the costliest natural disaster in our Nation’ s history, energy price
spikes , and a temporary slowdown in the housing sector. The resilience of our economy is a tribute
to America’ s workers and entrepreneurs . And well -timed, pro -growth tax policies helped create the
right c limate for innovation and entrepreneurship .
The F ederal deficit is dec lining and on a path to elimination. Last year, we successfully met our goal
of cutting the deficit in half , three years ahead of sc hedule . This occurred because tax relief helped
the economy to recover and grow, resulting in record -high revenues while we restrained non -security
discretionary spending . W ith continued strong economic growth and spending discipline , we are now
positioned to balance the budget by 2012, while providing for our national security and making tax
relief permanent.
My Budget proposes to keep non -security discretionary spending below inflation for the next
five years . My Budget also reforms projects and spending that don’t get the job done . W e need
la wmakers’support to help us accomplish this goal—inc luding reforms that will improve the
Congressional budget process .
T o bolster public confidence in the Government’ s ability to manage taxpa yers’ money successfully,
Congress should adopt earmark reform. The earmark process should be made more transparent,
ending the practice of concealing earmarks in so-called report language never inc luded in legislation.
The number and cost of earmarks should be cut by at least half by the end of this session. I ha ve also
called on Congress to adopt the legislative line -item veto , whic h gives the Legislative and Executive
Branc hes a tool to help eliminate w asteful spending . These common -sense reforms will help prevent
billions of taxpa yers’ dollars from being spent on unnecessary and unjustified projects .
T o keep this economy strong we must take on the c hallenge of entitlements . Social Security,
Medicare , and Medicaid are commitments of conscience , and so it is our duty to keep them
permanently sound. If we do not address this c hallenge , we will one da y lea ve our c hildren with
three bad options: huge tax increases , huge deficits , or huge and immediate cuts in benefits .
In the short term, my Budget works to slow the rate of growth of these programs , sa ving $96 billion
over five years . This Administration is also actively working with Congress to comprehensively
reform and improve these vital programs so they will be strong for the next generations of Americans .
I am optimistic about the future of our country. W e are an entrepreneurial and hard -working
Nation. And while we face great c hallenges , we enjoy great opportunities . This Budget reflects our
highest priorities while reducing the deficit and ac hieving a balanced budget by 2012. I am confident
that this approac h will help make our country more secure and more prosperous .